---
tags: []
parent: '98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition'
collections:
    - Guardianships
$version: 25174
$libraryID: 1
$itemKey: 5THZ9T9N

---
# **NC State Bar Ethics Opinions**

## **2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person (2007)**

### **Annotations**

“the prohibition against communications with represented persons does not apply to a lawyer acting solely as a guardian ad litem.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“It is alleged that Child A was sexually abused by her father. Attorney X and Guardian Ad Litem Y were appointed to represent Child A in the juvenile petition. Guardian Ad Litem Y is not an attorney. She is interested in interviewing the mother of Child A. The mother is represented in this matter by another attorney. Must Guardian Ad Litem Y obtain the approval of the mother's attorney before communicating with the mother?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“No. Rule 4.2 only prohibits communications with a represented person "\[d]uring \[the lawyer's] representation of a client."” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“Would Opinion #1 be different if Guardian Ad Litem Y is an attorney but is performing the role of guardian ad litem solely and is not performing the role of the attorney advocate?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“No. Guardian Ad Litem Y may communicate with the mother without obtaining the consent of the mother's attorney. If Guardian Ad Litem Y is not acting as the attorney advocate but is only serving as the appointed special guardian "at law" of the child, she is not subject to the prohibition in Rule 4.2” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“Would Opinion #1 change if the person with whom Guardian Ad Litem Y wanted to speak also had an appointed GAL?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

“No.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 19: Communications by Guardian Ad Litem With Represented Person”, 2007, p. 1)

## **2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem (2005)**

### **Annotations**

“role of a lawyer who is appointed guardian-ad-litem for respondent parent with diminished capacity.” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“Attorney A is appointed guardian-ad-litem (GAL) for a respondent parent with diminished capacity in a Termination of Parental Rights (TPR) action. The parent is indigent and, pursuant to N.C. Gen. Stat. § 7B-1111(a)(6), has also been appointed legal counsel, Attorney B. In In re Shepard, 03-212 (N.C. App. filed January 20, 2004), the court of appeals held that, in a TPR action based upon parental "incapability," a parent's GAL, who is a lawyer but is not providing legal representation to the parent, "may testify as to the ward's parental capability, and ultimately against the interest of their ward as to the termination hearing” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“The basis for the court's decision stems from the observation that the North Carolina State Bar's Rules of Professional Conduct do not appear to govern the conduct of a GAL who acts "purely as a guardian and not an attorney.". at 8.” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“Is a lawyer, appointed solely as GAL for the parent, governed by the Rules of Professional Conduct?” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“some of the Rules of Professional Conduct create duties that are owed only in the professional client-lawyer relationship. For example, the confidentiality rule only applies when a lawyer has a client-lawyer relationship or has agreed to consider the formation of one. Scope, cmt. \[4]. Conversely, there are other rules that apply although a lawyer is acting in a nonprofessional capacity” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“The GAL does not have a client-lawyer relationship with the parent, and therefore, would not be governed by the Rules of Professional Conduct relating to duties owed to clients. See RPC 249. Notwithstanding the above, it may be prudent for the GAL to explain fully to the parent, to the extent possible, his or her role in the litigation, specifically that the GAL is not acting as the parent's lawyer.” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“If the court appointed a lawyer to serve both as lawyer for the parent and as the parent's GAL, do the Rules of Professional Conduct require that the lawyer keep all communications confidential?” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“A lawyer serving as both lawyer and GAL for a parent in a TPR action must comply with Rule 1.6” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“If the court appoints the same lawyer as counsel for the parent and as the parent's GAL, does the lawyer have a conflict of interest?” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“If the role of the GAL is limited to ensuring procedural due process for the parent by helping to explain and execute his or her rights, then this role is consistent with the role of a lawyer representing a client. Therefore, there is no conflict of interest in undertaking representation as both GAL and lawyer. The Ethics Committee takes no position at this time as to whether the GAL has additional responsibilities or whether an expanded role could result in a conflict of interest.” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 1)

“how can the parent's GAL perform his duties with competence if the parent has been advised by her lawyer that she should not share confidential information with the GAL?” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 2)

“The performance of the GAL's duties, as distinct from a lawyer's duties to a client, is not a matter upon which the Ethics Committee can opine” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 2)

“Can the parent's lawyer ever advise the client to confer candidly with the GAL under the Rules of Professional Conduct?” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 2)

“Yes. In light of the Shepard decision, a lawyer should inform the parent, to the extent possible, that the GAL does not owe the parent a duty of confidentiality and that the GAL could be called upon to testify as to parental capability. Then, the lawyer must analyze each case and determine whether the parent's full disclosure to the GAL will accomplish the goals of the representation. If the lawyer believes full disclosure is appropriate under the circumstances, he or she may advise the client that he may be candid with the GAL. Likewise, a lawyer may reasonably conclude that full disclosure would not be in the parent's interests and may advise the client against it.” (“2004 Formal Ethics Opinion 11: Lawyer as Appointed Guardian Ad Litem”, 2005, p. 2)

## **2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate (2022)**

### **Annotations**

“an attorney appointed by the court as the guardian ad litem and the attorney advocate in an abuse, neglect, and dependency proceeding may not testify as a witness unless directed to do so by the court.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“Under N.C. Gen. Stat. § 7B-601(a), an attorney advocate must be appointed “to assure protection of the juvenile’s legal rights” in every case where a nonattorney is appointed as the guardian ad litem.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“an attorney who is not associated with the GAL Program is appointed to serve the dual role of GAL volunteer and GAL attorney advocate.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“May the attorney file with the court and offer a GAL court report into evidence that he/she drafted?” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“Yes, if the court appoints the attorney solely in the GAL role. However, if the court appoints the attorney in the dual role of GAL and attorney advocate, the attorney may only proceed if the attorney informs the court of the ethical concerns associated with the attorney’s dual role and the court concludes that the attorney may proceed in the dual role.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“Generally, when an attorney is appointed in a purely GAL role, the attorney does not have an attorney-client relationship with the child and therefore most of the Rules of Professional Conduct do not apply. 2004 FEO 11. However, when an attorney is appointed to serve the dual role of GAL and attorney advocate, the Rules of Professional Conduct apply. For example, except under limited circumstances, attorneys are prohibited from acting as an advocate at a trial if the attorney is likely to be a necessary witness. Rule 3.7.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 1)

“2012 FEO 9, the ethics committee opined that an attorney appointed to represent a child in a contested custody or visitation case should decline the appointment unless the order of appointment identifies the attorney’s role and specifies the responsibility of the attorney. The opinion directs the attorney to remind the court of the attorney’s professional limitations regarding testifying as a necessary witness under Rule 3.7 and assist the court with defining the attorney’s role” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“An attorney may only prepare the GAL report and testify if the court is informed by the attorney of the conflict created by the dual roles (e.g., that an attorney cannot serve as a necessary witness and simultaneously serve as the advocate) and the court permits the attorney to serve dual roles in the proceeding.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“If the court declines the attorney’s request to limit the appointment to one role, do the North Carolina Rules of Professional Conduct, specifically Rule 3.7, permit the attorney to be a witness and be subject to cross-examination?” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“No, unless at the time of appointment the attorney has asked the court to clarify the attorney’s role, and the court orders the attorney to serve the dual role of GAL and attorney advocate.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“An attorney who is identified as a witness has a professional responsibility, pursuant to Rule 3.7, to determine whether he or she is “likely to be a necessary witness” and, as such, is disqualified from acting as an advocate at the trial. It is generally agreed that when the anticipated testimony is relevant, material, and unobtainable by other means, the attorney’s testimony is “necessary.” See Ann. Model Rules of Professional Conduct R. 3.7 (6th ed. 2007), p. 361 (internal citations omitted); 2012 FEO 15” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“the court” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

“has concurrent jurisdiction on matters of ethics and maintains inherent powers to deal with its attorneys. See N.C. Gen. Stat. § 84-36. Therefore, if the judge decides that in the interest of judicial efficiency the attorney will serve dual roles, the attorney may serve dual roles and prepare and file a GAL court report, testify as to his findings in the GAL court report, and simultaneously serve as the attorney advocate for the children. Under this limited circumstance, the attorney may be called as a witness and be subject to cross-examination.” (“2022 Formal Ethics Opinion 1: Attorney Serving Dual Role of Guardian Ad Litem and Advocate”, 2022, p. 2)

## **98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition (1999)**

### **Annotations**

“a lawyer may represent a person who is resisting an incompetency petition although the person may suffer from a mental disability, provided the lawyer determines that resisting the incompetency petition is not frivolous.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“Husband, who is also elderly, contacted Attorney A because Husband did not understand why his wife was removed from the home. He asked Attorney A to investigate. Attorney A discovered that Wife was the subject of an involuntary incompetency proceeding. When Attorney A gained access to Wife, she indicated that she wanted Attorney A to represent her in resisting the involuntary incompetency petition. She repeatedly said that she wanted to go home to live with her husband.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“Attorney A also learned that Husband was investigated by police relative to allegations of abuse and neglect of Wife. Attorney A met with Husband and told him that he could not represent Wife in resisting the incompetency petition and represent Husband in defending against an action in connection with Wife's care or treatment. Husband agreed that Attorney A's representation would be limited to representing Wife in resisting the incompetency petition and that Husband would be responsible for paying the legal fees for that representation” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“At the incompetency hearing before the clerk, the attorney for the Department of Social Services (DSS) and the guardian ad litem who had been appointed for Wife by the clerk, contended that Attorney A had no "standing or authority" to pursue motions on behalf of Wife. They argued that Attorney A had a conflict of interest due to his initial representation of Husband and Husband's continued payment for the representation.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“During the incompetency hearing, Attorney A was not allowed to participate as counsel for Wife. Attorney A was called as a witness, however. Wife, when she testified, could not identify Attorney A as her lawyer. However, she expressed a desire to return home with her husband to avoid becoming a ward of the state. At the close of the evidence, the clerk declared Wife incompetent and appointed the director of DSS to be her legal guardian.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“Does Attorney A have a conflict of interest because he initially represented Husband?” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“No. The representation of Wife in the incompetency proceeding is not a representation that is adverse to the interest of Husband. Furthermore, Attorney A obtained the consent of Husband to represent only Wife in the incompetency proceeding. The exercise of Attorney A's independent professional judgment on behalf of Wife is not impaired by the prior representation of Husband” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“Does it matter that Husband pays for the representation of Wife?” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 1)

“No. Rule 1.8(f) of the Revised Rules of Professional Conduct permits a lawyer to accept compensation for representing a client from someone other than the client if the client consents after consultation; there is no interference with the lawyer's independent professional judgment or the attorney-client relationship; and the confidentiality of client information is protected.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“Wife has been declared incompetent by the state and a guardian appointed to represent her interests. Does Attorney A have to treat Wife as incompetent and defer to the decision of the guardian relative to the representation of Wife?” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“No. Wife is entitled to counsel of her own choosing particularly with regard to a proceeding that so clearly and directly affects her freedom to continue to make decisions for herself. Rule 1.14(a) provides as follows: "\[w]hen a client's ability to make adequately considered decisions in connection with the representation is impaired, whether because of minority, mental disability, or for some other reason, the lawyer shall, as far as reasonably possible, maintain a normal client-lawyer relationship with the client.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“If Attorney A is able to maintain a relatively normal client-lawyer relationship with Wife and Attorney A reasonably believes that Wife is able to make adequately considered decisions in connection with her representation, Attorney A may continue to represent her alone without including the guardian in the representation. However, if Attorney A has reason to believe that Wife is incapable of making decisions about her representation and is indeed incompetent, the appeal of the finding of incompetency may be frivolous. If so, Attorney A may not represent her on the appeal. See Rule 3.1 (prohibiting frivolous claims and defenses)” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“Once the guardian was appointed for Wife, did the guardian become Attorney A's client, or otherwise step into the shoes of Wife, such that Attorney A may only take directions from the guardian and not from Wife?” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“No. Rule 1.14(a) quoted above indicates that a lawyer may represent a client under a mental disability. The lawyer owes the duty of loyalty to the client and not to the guardian or legal representative of the client, particularly if the lawyer concludes that the legal guardian is not acting in the best interest of the client.” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“Does Attorney A have to turn over Wife's legal file to Wife's appointed guardian?” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

“No. When a guardian is appointed for a client, a lawyer may turn over materials in the client's file and disclose other confidential information to the guardian if the release of such confidential information is consistent with the purpose of the original representation of the client or consistent with the express instructions of the client. See, e.g., RPC 206 (attorney for deceased client may release confidential information to the personal representative of the estate). However, where, as here, the release of confidential information to a guardian is contrary to the purpose of the representation, the lawyer must protect the confidentiality of the client's information and may not release the legal file to the guardian absent a court order. See Rule 1.6(d)(3).” (“98 Formal Ethics Opinion 16: Representation of Client Resisting an Incompetency Petition”, 1999, p. 2)

## **RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence (1993)**

### **Annotations**

“May the attorney seek the appointment of a guardian or a representative payee for the client?” (“RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence”, 1993, p. 1)

“Yes.” (“RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence”, 1993, p. 1)

“In so doing, the attorney may disclose only her belief that there exists a good faith basis for the relief requested and may not disclose the confidential information which led her to conclude that the client is incompetent, except as permitted or required by Rule 4(c).” (“RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence”, 1993, p. 1)

“In taking that action, may the attorney reveal confidential information so as to establish the grounds for guardianship or representative payee status?” (“RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence”, 1993, p. 1)

“See the answer to Inquiry #1.” (“RPC 157: Representing a Client of Questionable Competence”, 1993, p. 1)

## **RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict (1994)**

### **Annotations**

“an attorney may seek the appointment of an independent guardian ad litem for a child whose guardian has an obvious conflict of interest in fulfilling his fiduciary duties to the child.” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“A's father, F, and M originally asked Attorney X to represent both M and A. Attorney X explained that there appeared to be a conflict of interest between M and A and that Attorney X would be willing to represent only A. M and F agreed. Attorney X entered into a fee agreement with F signing as guardian for A. No lawsuit has been filed at this time. After investigating the motor vehicle accident, Attorney X concluded that M was most likely negligent, although the driver/owner of the oncoming vehicle may also have been negligent. F left a telephone message for Attorney X indicating that he was no longer interested in pursuing A's claims since it appeared likely that M would be the major defendant and if a judgment was entered against her, it would raise F and M's automobile insurance rates.” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“Attorney X believes that A's parents are not acting in A's best interests. They appear to be protecting their own interests to the exclusion of A's interests. Having advised F that Attorney X believes that he has an ethical and moral duty to proceed, is Attorney X's ethical duty satisfied?” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“Yes.” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“on these particular facts, where F's only stated reason for failing to pursue his daughter's claim is the protection of the family's automobile insurance rates and no other concerns or contingencies have been indicated by F, it would be permissible for Attorney X to seek the appointment of an independent guardian ad litem to represent A's interests. This would be consistent with Attorney X's primary duty to represent the interest of A, who is the real party in interest. See CPR 15.” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“May Attorney X seek the appointment of an independent guardian ad litem and proceed with filing suit after the independent guardian ad litem has reviewed the case and agrees that Attorney X should proceed?” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

“Yes.” (“RPC 163: Request for Independent Guardian Ad Litem Where Existing Guardian Has Conflict”, 1994, p. 1)

## **RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate (1997)**

### **Annotations**

“lawyer may not communicate with a child who is represented by a GAL and an attorney advocate unless the lawyer obtains the consent of the attorney advocate.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“The attorney for Joey's mother, Attorney M, would like to interview Joey without informing the GAL or the attorney advocate. May he do so?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“Rule 7.4(1) provides that, during the course of his or her representation of a client, a lawyer is prohibited from communicating or causing another to communicate about the subject of the representation with a party the lawyer knows to be represented by another lawyer in the matter unless the lawyer has the consent of the other lawyer or is authorized by law to do so. Joey is represented by an attorney, and the attorney advocate's consent must be obtained prior to any communication by Attorney M with Joey.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“Is the permission of the attorney for DSS sufficient to allow Attorney M to interview Joey without the consent of the attorney advocate?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“No, the attorney for DSS does not represent Joey.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“The district attorney intends to prosecute the mother for child abuse. The district attorney would like to interview Joey without informing or obtaining the consent of the GAL or the attorney advocate. May the district attorney interview Joey under these circumstances?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“No. The comment to Rule 7.4 states, "This rule also covers any person, whether or not a party to a formal proceeding, who is represented by counsel concerning the matter in question." See also RPC 87.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“May the district attorney instruct a sheriff's deputy to interview Joey without informing or obtaining the consent of the GAL or the attorney advocate?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“No, an attorney may not instruct an agent to do that which the attorney cannot do. See Rule 3.3.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 1)

“If the GAL is also an attorney, would any of the above opinions be different?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 2)

“No. If an attorney advocate was appointed, the GAL is not acting in the capacity of an attorney for the juvenile. Rule 7.4(d) requires the consent of the attorney representing the client prior to direct communication with the client.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 2)

“If the court appoints a GAL for Joey but does not appoint an attorney advocate, may the attorney for Joey's mother, the district attorney, or the attorney for DSS interview Joey without the consent of the GAL?” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 2)

“No, the consent of the GAL must be obtained before communicating with Joey. This is consistent with the policy and purpose behind G.S. §71-586. See also RPC 61.” (“RPC 249: Communication with a Child Represented by GAL and Attorney Advocate”, 1997, p. 2)

## **2002 Formal Ethics Opinion 8: Direct Contact with Lawyer Appointed Guardian Ad Litem for Minor Plaintiff (2003)**

### **Annotations**

“a lawyer who is appointed the guardian ad litem for a minor plaintiff in a tort action and is represented in this capacity by legal counsel, must be treated by opposing counsel as a represented party and, therefore, direct contact with the guardian ad litem, without consent of counsel, is prohibited.” (“2002 Formal Ethics Opinion 8: Direct Contact with Lawyer Appointed Guardian Ad Litem for Minor Plaintiff”, 2003, p. 1)

“As a party, the guardian ad litem may choose to be represented by legal counsel and permit legal counsel to make decisions about the strategy for the litigation. See Rule of Professional Conduct 1.2, cmt. \[1] ("In questions of means, the lawyer should assume responsibility for technical and legal tactical issues...."). The fact that the guardian ad litem is a lawyer does not make him or her co-counsel for the purpose of litigating the case.” (“2002 Formal Ethics Opinion 8: Direct Contact with Lawyer Appointed Guardian Ad Litem for Minor Plaintiff”, 2003, p. 1)

“if a lawyer is appointed, he or she must fulfill the responsibilities of the guardian ad litem in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the Rules of Professional Conduct.” (“2002 Formal Ethics Opinion 8: Direct Contact with Lawyer Appointed Guardian Ad Litem for Minor Plaintiff”, 2003, p. 1)

## **2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff (2006)**

### **Annotations**

“If the lawyer concludes that pursuit of a lawsuit filed against a defendant is frivolous, but the GAL for the minor client insists on continuing the litigation, the lawyer must either move to withdraw from the representation or seek to have the GAL removed.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Lawyer was hired by the mother of a minor (Minor) to file a personal injury action. The mother (GAL) is the appointed guardian ad litem for Minor. Minor was a passenger in a car driven by his maternal grandmother (Grandmother) when he was severely injured as a result of a collision between a truck and Grandmother's car. Based upon the limited information that was initially available, Lawyer brought an action against the driver of the truck but not against Grandmother. Subsequent scientific investigation by Lawyer's expert has led the expert to conclude that Grandmother was negligent and the truck driver was not negligent. Grandmother has substantial assets” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Based upon the expert's analysis, Lawyer believes that the action against the truck driver is not warranted by the facts and should be dismissed. He also believes that the interests of Minor can only be protected if a personal injury lawsuit is initiated against Grandmother. GAL does not want a lawsuit filed against her mother” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Does Lawyer owe a duty of confidentiality to GAL?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Yes, in her representative capacity as GAL for Minor.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Minor and GAL, in her representative capacity, are both clients of Lawyer” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“2002 FEO 8” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Lawyer's primary duty is to represent the interests of Minor, who is the real party in interest. See RPC 163.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Lawyer owes the duty of confidentiality to Minor and to GAL acting in her official capacity. See e.g., RPC 195. To the extent GAL acts outside of her official capacity as the legal representative for Minor, the information learned by Lawyer may be disclosed, even over the objections of GAL, if necessary to represent Minor” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“If GAL insists that Lawyer continue to prosecute the lawsuit against the truck driver, what should Lawyer do?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Rule 3.1” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“Lawyer must file a motion to withdraw. See Rule 1.16(b)(8). As an alternative to withdrawal, if Lawyer believes GAL is failing to fulfill her fiduciary duties, Lawyer may seek to have GAL removed and replaced by an independent guardian ad litem who can evaluate the action against the truck driver and the claim against Grandmother objectively and make an unbiased decision about the conduct of the litigation. See e.g., Rule 1.14(b); see also RPC 163 and 2002 FEO 8.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 1)

“What communication should Lawyer have with his clients prior to filing a motion to withdraw?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“Prior to filing a motion to withdraw, Lawyer must inform GAL and Minor of the status of the case, explain the reason he is moving to withdraw, and provide appropriate legal advice. Rule 1.2 and Rule 1.4.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“What information may Lawyer disclose about the dispute with GAL in either a motion to withdraw or a motion to remove GAL?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“Rule 1.6(b)(1) permits disclosure of confidential information to comply with the Rules, the law, or a court order. (The other exceptions to the duty of confidentiality that are found in Rule 1.6 are not relevant.) Lawyer's motion to withdraw may, therefore, disclose only that Lawyer believes that his withdrawal is required by Rule 1.16(a)(1) (representation will result in violation of the Rules of Professional Conduct), Rule 1.16(b)(2) (client insists on action that is contrary to the advice and judgment of the lawyer), and/or Rule 1.16(b)(8) (client insists upon presenting a claim or defense that is not warranted under existing law). To further protect the confidences of Minor, Lawyer may ask that the court consider the motion in camera.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“A motion to remove and replace GAL should, similarly, avoid the disclosure of confidential information unless the disclosure is allowed by law or court order, or disclosure is impliedly authorized to carry out the representation. Rule 1.6(a). For example, Lawyer may disclose information about GAL relative to actions that violate her fiduciary duties to Minor.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“GAL is also named in her individual capacity as a plaintiff in the lawsuit against Grandmother in order to pursue her personal claim for reimbursement of medical expenditures made on behalf of Minor. Lawyer also represents her in this capacity. Does the dual representation of GAL in her personal and official capacities alter the responses set forth above?” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

“Yes. Lawyer may not file a motion to remove GAL while GAL is represented by Lawyer in her personal capacity because this action would be directly adverse to GAL. Rule 1.7(a). Even if Lawyer withdraws from the representation of GAL in her personal capacity only (and continues to represent Minor and GAL in her official capacity as representative for Minor), Lawyer may not file a motion to remove and replace GAL because Rule 1.9(a) prohibits a lawyer from representing a person whose interests are materially adverse to those of former client in the same or a substantially related matter. Therefore, the only course of action available to Lawyer is to move to withdraw from the representation of all of the plaintiffs if he believes that the action against the truck driver is frivolous.” (“2006 Formal Ethics Opinion 9 Pursuing Frivolous Claim at the Direction of GAL for Plaintiff”, 2006, p. 2)

# **NC Cases**

## **In re Cranor, 786 S.E.2d 379 (2016)**

### **Annotations**

“This matter involves an incompetency proceeding commenced by Frank Cranor to have his sister Carole Cranor declared incompetent and to have him appointed as her general guardian.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

“Carole Cranor consulted her long-time, close attorney-friend, Harriet Hopkins ("Ms. Hopkins"), for help in choosing a longterm care facility and in getting her legal and financial affairs in order. Carole Cranor also appointed Ms. Hopkins as her attorney-in-fact via a durable power of attorney ("DPOA") that Ms. Hopkins drafted.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

“Frank Cranor filed the petition to have his sister Carole adjudicated incompetent and requested that he be appointed as her general guardian, citing a concern that his sister was being taken advantage of by Ms. Hopkins.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

“On 8 June 2013, Carole Cranor hired Attorney Andrews to represent her in the incompetency proceeding.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

“Attorney Andrews was successful in obtaining a Rule 12(b)(6) dismissal of Frank Cranor's incompetency petition.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

“this appeal arises from orders entered after the dismissal of the incompetency petition.” (“In re Cranor”, 2016, p. 1)

## **In re Clark, 688 S.E.2d 484 (2010)**

### **Annotations**

“Judge Gore entered an Order Disqualifying Attorney that was subsequently signed on 26 June 2007. In that order, Judge Gore recited that Booth Harrington opposed restoration of Ms. Clark's competency; that no representative of Booth Harrington "had contacted or communicated with \[Ms. Clark] since the filing of the Petition of Restoration;" that Ms. Clark had indicated that she did not want Booth Harrington to represent her; and that Ms. Clark "wished to proceed on her own accord fully" and ordered that Mr. Johns and Ms. Jones be "disqualified and removed from representing \[Ms. Clark] in this proceeding."” (“In re Clark”, 2010, p. 3)
